.. _sec:visitor:

Visitor Paradigm
----------------

An alternative to the bind/eval mechanism is to use a *visitor*  [1]_
over an expression tree. The visitor concept applies a user-specified
visitor class to all nodes in an expression tree (in a post-order
traversal). The visitor paradigm can be used as a more efficient
replacement for bind/eval, to identify whether an expression has a
desired pattern, or to locate children of an expression tree.

A performs postfix-order traversal of the AST represented by an . The
class specifies the interface from which users may derive that perform
specific tasks.

The method must be overridden for each type of node (, , , and ). Any
state that the needs to preserve between nodes must be kept within the
class. are invoked by calling the method should not be invoked by user
code ordinarily.

A visitor is a user-defined class that inherits from the class defined
in . That class is repeated here for reference:

class Visitor public: Visitor() virtual Â Visitor() virtual void
visit(BinaryFunction\* b) = 0; virtual void visit(Immediate\* i) = 0;
virtual void visit(RegisterAST\* r) = 0; virtual void
visit(MultiRegisterAST\* r) = 0; virtual void visit(Dereference\* d) =
0;;

A user provides implementations of the four methods. When applied to an
(via the method) the InstructionAPI will perform a post-order traversal
of the tree, calling the appropriate method at each node.

As a simple example, the following code prints out the name of each
register used in an :

.. code:: c

Visitors may also set and use internal state. For example, the following
visitor (presented without surrounding use code) matches x86 and x86-64
instructions that add 0 to a register (effectively a noop).

.. code:: c

.. [1]
   From *Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software* by Gamma, Helm,
   Johnson, and Vlissides
